Mrs Frisby looked again at the sun and saw that she faced an unpleasant choice. She could go home
by the same roundabout way she had come, in which case she would surely end up walking alone in
the woods in the dark — a frightening prospect, for at night the forest was alive with danger. Then the
owl came out to hunt, and foxes, weasels and strange wild cats stalked among the tree trunks.
The other choice would be dangerous, too, but with luck it would get her home before dark. That
would be to take a straighter route, across the farmyard between the barn and the chicken house, going
not too close to the house but cutting the distance by half. The cat would be there somewhere, but by
daylight — and by staying in the open, away from the shrubs — she could probably spot him before he
saw her.
The cat: He was called Dragon. Farmer Fitzgibbon’s wife had given him the name as a joke when
he was a small kitten pretending to be fierce. But when he grew up, the name turned out to be an apt
one. He was enormous, with a huge, broad head and a large mouth full of curving fangs, needle sharp.
He had seven claws on each foot and a thick, furry tail, which lashed angrily from side to side. In
colour he was orange and white, with glaring yellow eyes; and when he leaped to kill, he gave a high,
strangled scream that froze his victims where they stood.
But Mrs Frisby preferred not to think about that. Instead, as she came out of the woods from Mr
Ages’ house and reached the farmyard fence she thought about Timothy. She thought of how his eyes
shone with merriment when he made up small jokes, which he did frequently, and how invariably kind
he was to his small, scatterbrained sister Cynthia. The other children sometimes laughed at her when
she made mistakes, or grew impatient with her because she was forever losing things, but Timothy
never did. Instead, he would help her find them. And when Cynthia herself had been sick in bed with a
cold, he had sat by her side for hours and entertained her with stories. He made these up out of his
head, and he seemed to have a bottomless supply of them.
Taking a firm grip on her packets of medicine, Mrs Frisby went under the fence and set out
towards the farmyard. The first stretch was a long pasture; the barn itself, square and red and big, rose
in the distance to her right; to her left, farther off were the chicken houses.
When at length she came abreast of the barn, she saw the wire fence that marked the other end of
the pasture; and as she approached it, she was startled by a sudden outburst of noise. She thought at
first it was a hen, strayed from the chicken-yard — caught by a fox? She looked down the fence and
saw that it was no hen at all, but a young crow, flapping in the grass, acting most oddly. As she
watched, he fluttered to the top wire of the fence, where he perched nervously for a moment. Then he
spread his wings, flapped hard, and took off — but after flying four feet he stopped with a snap and
crashed to the ground again, shedding a flurry of black feathers and squawking loudly.
He was tied to the fence. A piece of something silvery — it looked like wire — was tangled around
one of his legs; the other end of it was caught in the fence. Mrs Frisby walked closer, and then she
could see it was not wire after all, but a length of silver-coloured string, probably left over from a
Christmas package.